Government
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search
For other uses, see Government (disambiguation).
"Gov" redirects here. For other uses, see Gov (disambiguation).

This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages)
This article includes a list of general references, but it remains largely unverified because it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations. (June 2019)
The examples and perspective in this article deal primarily with Western culture and do not represent a worldwide view of the subject. (June 2019)
Part of the Politics series
Basic forms of government
Ballot box
Power source
Democracy
Oligarchy
Autocracy
Anarchism
Power ideology
Monarchy vs. republic
Authoritarian vs. libertarian
Global vs. local
Power structure
Unitary
Client state
Federalism
International relations
A coloured voting box.svg Politics portal
vte
Part of a series on
Politics
Ballot box
IndexOutlineCategory
Primary topics
Political systems
Academic disciplines
Public administration
Policy
Organs of government
Related topics
Subseries
Electoral systems
Elections (voting)
UnitarismFederalismForm of government
IdeologyPolitical campaigning
Political parties
A coloured voting box.svg Politics portal
vte
A government is the system or group of people governing an organized community, generally a state.


World's states coloured by form of government1
     Full presidential republics2	     Semi-presidential republics2
     Republics with an executive president elected by or nominated by the legislature that may or may not be subject to parliamentary confidence.	     Parliamentary republics2
     Parliamentary constitutional monarchies	     Constitutional monarchies which have a separate head of government but where royalty still holds significant executive and/or legislative power
     Absolute monarchies	     One-party states
     Countries where constitutional provisions for government have been suspended (e.g. military dictatorships)	     Countries which do not fit any of the above systems (e.g. provisional governments).
1 This map was compiled according to the Wikipedia list of countries by system of government. See there for sources.
2 Several states constitutionally deemed to be multiparty republics are broadly described by outsiders as authoritarian states. This map presents only the de jure form of government, and not the de facto degree of democracy.vte
In the case of its broad associative definition, government normally consists of legislature, executive, and judiciary. Government is a means by which organizational policies are enforced, as well as a mechanism for determining policy. Each government has a kind of constitution, a statement of its governing principles and philosophy.

While all types of organizations have governance, the term government is often used more specifically, to refer to the approximately 200 independent national governments and subsidiary organizations.

Historically prevalent forms of government include monarchy, aristocracy, timocracy, oligarchy, democracy, theocracy and tyranny. The main aspect of any philosophy of government is how political power is obtained, with the two main forms being electoral contest and hereditary succession.


Contents
1	Definitions and etymology
2	History
3	Political science
3.1	Classification
3.2	Social-political ambiguity
3.3	Dialectical forms
4	Forms
4.1	Autocracy
4.2	Aristocracy
4.3	Democracy
4.3.1	Republics
4.3.2	Federalism
5	Economic systems
6	Maps
7	See also
7.1	Principles
7.2	Autonomy
8	Notes
9	References
10	External links
Definitions and etymology
A government is the system to govern a state or community.

The word government derives, ultimately, from the Greek verb ??ße???? [kubernáo] (meaning to steer with gubernaculum (rudder), the metaphorical sense being attested in Plato's Ship of State).

The Columbia Encyclopedia defines government as "a system of social control under which the right to make laws, and the right to enforce them, is vested in a particular group in society".[1]

While all types of organizations have governance, the word government is often used more specifically to refer to the approximately 200 independent national governments on Earth, as well as their subsidiary organizations.[2]

Finally, government is also sometimes used in English as a synonym for governance.

History
Main articles: Political history of the world and Political philosophy
The moment and place that the phenomenon of human government developed is lost in time; however, history does record the formations of early governments. About 5,000 years ago, the first small city-states appeared.[3] By the third to second millenniums BC, some of these had developed into larger governed areas: Sumer, Ancient Egypt, the Indus Valley Civilization, and the Yellow River Civilization.[4]

The development of agriculture and water control projects were a catalyst for the development of governments.[5] On occasion a chief of a tribe was elected by various rituals or tests of strength to govern his tribe, sometimes with a group of elder tribesmen as a council. The human ability to precisely communicate abstract, learned information allowed humans to become ever more effective at agriculture,[6] and that allowed for ever increasing population densities.[3] David Christian explains how this resulted in states with laws and governments.

As farming populations gathered in larger and denser communities, interactions between different groups increased and the social pressure rose until, in a striking parallel with star formation, new structures suddenly appeared, together with a new level of complexity. Like stars, cities and states reorganize and energize the smaller objects within their gravitational field.[3]

Starting at the end of the 17th century, the prevalence of republican forms of government grew. The Glorious Revolution in England, the American Revolution, and the French Revolution contributed to the growth of representative forms of government. The Soviet Union was the first large country to have a Communist government.[2] Since the fall of the Berlin Wall, liberal democracy has become an even more prevalent form of government.[7]

In the nineteenth and twentieth century, there was a significant increase in the size and scale of government at the national level.[8] This included the regulation of corporations and the development of the welfare state.[7]

Political science
Main article: Political science
Classification
In political science, it has long been a goal to create a typology or taxonomy of polities, as typologies of political systems are not obvious.[9] It is especially important in the political science fields of comparative politics and international relations. Like all categories discerned within forms of government, the boundaries of government classifications are either fluid or ill-defined.

Superficially, all governments have an official or ideal form. The United States is a constitutional republic, while the former Soviet Union was a socialist republic. However self-identification is not objective, and as Kopstein and Lichbach argue, defining regimes can be tricky.[10] For example, Voltaire argued that "the Holy Roman Empire is neither Holy, nor Roman, nor an Empire".[11]

Identifying a form of government is also difficult because many political systems originate as socio-economic movements and are then carried into governments by parties naming themselves after those movements; all with competing political-ideologies. Experience with those movements in power, and the strong ties they may have to particular forms of government, can cause them to be considered as forms of government in themselves.

Other complications include general non-consensus or deliberate "distortion or bias" of reasonable technical definitions to political ideologies and associated forms of governing, due to the nature of politics in the modern era. For example: The meaning of "conservatism" in the United States has little in common with the way the word's definition is used elsewhere. As Ribuffo notes, "what Americans now call conservatism much of the world calls liberalism or neoliberalism"; a "conservative" in Finland would be labeled a "socialist" in the United States.[12] Since the 1950s conservatism in the United States has been chiefly associated with the Republican Party. However, during the era of segregation many Southern Democrats were conservatives, and they played a key role in the Conservative Coalition that controlled Congress from 1937 to 1963.[13]

Social-political ambiguity
Opinions vary by individuals concerning the types and properties of governments that exist. "Shades of gray" are commonplace in any government and its corresponding classification. Even the most liberal democracies limit rival political activity to one extent or another while the most tyrannical dictatorships must organize a broad base of support thereby creating difficulties for "pigeonholing" governments into narrow categories. Examples include the claims of the United States as being a plutocracy rather than a democracy since some American voters believe elections are being manipulated by wealthy Super PACs.[14]

Dialectical forms
Main article: Plato's five regimes
The Classical Greek philosopher Plato discusses five types of regimes: aristocracy, timocracy, oligarchy, democracy and tyranny. Plato also assigns a man to each of these regimes to illustrate what they stand for. The tyrannical man would represent tyranny for example. These five regimes progressively degenerate starting with aristocracy at the top and tyranny at the bottom.

Forms
For a more comprehensive list, see List of forms of government.
One method of classifying governments is through which people have the authority to rule. This can either be one person (an autocracy, such as monarchy), a select group of people (an aristocracy), or the people as a whole (a democracy, such as a republic).

Thomas Hobbes stated on their classification:[15]

The difference of Commonwealths consisteth in the difference of the sovereign, or the person representative of all and every one of the multitude. And because the sovereignty is either in one man, or in an assembly of more than one; and into that assembly either every man hath right to enter, or not every one, but certain men distinguished from the rest; it is manifest there can be but three kinds of Commonwealth. For the representative must needs be one man, or more; and if more, then it is the assembly of all, or but of a part. When the representative is one man, then is the Commonwealth a monarchy; when an assembly of all that will come together, then it is a democracy, or popular Commonwealth; when an assembly of a part only, then it is called an aristocracy. Other kind of Commonwealth there can be none: for either one, or more, or all, must have the sovereign power (which I have shown to be indivisible) entire.

Autocracy
Main article: Autocracy
An autocracy is a system of government in which supreme power is concentrated in the hands of one person, whose decisions are subject to neither external legal restraints nor regularized mechanisms of popular control (except perhaps for the implicit threat of a coup d'état or mass insurrection).[16]

Aristocracy
Main article: Aristocracy
Aristocracy (Greek ???st???at?a aristokratía, from ???st?? aristos "excellent", and ???t?? kratos "power") is a form of government that places power in the hands of a small, privileged ruling class.[17]

Many monarchies were aristocracies, although in modern constitutional monarchies the monarch himself or herself has little real power. The term aristocracy could also refer to the non-peasant, non-servant, and non-city classes in the feudal system.

Democracy
Main article: Democracy
Democracy is a system of government where the citizens exercise power by voting. In a direct democracy, the citizens as a whole form a governing body and vote directly on each issue. In a representative democracy the citizens elect representatives from among themselves. These representatives meet to form a governing body, such as a legislature. In a constitutional democracy the powers of the majority are exercised within the framework of a representative democracy, but the constitution limits the majority and protects the minority, usually through the enjoyment by all of certain individual rights, e.g. freedom of speech, or freedom of association.[18][19]

Republics
Main article: Republic
A republic is a form of government in which the country is considered a "public matter" (Latin: res publica), not the private concern or property of the rulers, and where offices of states are subsequently directly or indirectly elected or appointed rather than inherited. The people, or some significant portion of them, have supreme control over the government and where offices of state are elected or chosen by elected people.[20][21] A common simplified definition of a republic is a government where the head of state is not a monarch.[22][23] Montesquieu included both democracies, where all the people have a share in rule, and aristocracies or oligarchies, where only some of the people rule, as republican forms of government.[24]

Other terms used to describe different republics include democratic republic, parliamentary republic, semi-presidential republic, presidential republic, federal republic, and Islamic republic.

Federalism
Main article: Federalism
[icon]	
This section needs expansion. You can help by adding to it. (January 2013)
Federalism is a political concept in which a group of members are bound together by covenant with a governing representative head. The term "federalism" is also used to describe a system of government in which sovereignty is constitutionally divided between a central governing authority and constituent political units, variously called states, provinces or otherwise. Federalism is a system based upon democratic principles and institutions in which the power to govern is shared between national and provincial/state governments, creating what is often called a federation. Proponents are often called federalists.

Economic systems
Further information: Economic system
Historically, most political systems originated as socioeconomic ideologies. Experience with those movements in power and the strong ties they may have to particular forms of government can cause them to be considered as forms of government in themselves.

Term	Definition
Capitalism	A social-economic system in which the means of production (machines, tools, factories, etc.) are under private ownership and their use is for profit.
Communism	A social-economic system in which means of production are commonly owned (either by the people directly, through the commune or by communist society), and production is undertaken for use, rather than for profit.[25][26] Communist society is thus stateless, classless, moneyless, and democratic.
Distributism	A social-economic system in which widespread property ownership as fundamental right;[27] the means of production are spread as widely as possible rather than being centralized under the control of the state (state socialism), a few individuals (plutocracy), or corporations (corporatocracy).[28] Distributism fundamentally opposes socialism and capitalism,[29][30] which distributists view as equally flawed and exploitative. In contrast, distributism seeks to subordinate economic activity to human life as a whole, to our spiritual life, our intellectual life, our family life".[31]
Feudalism	A social-economic system of land ownership and duties. Under feudalism, all the land in a kingdom was the king's. However, the king would give some of the land to the lords or nobles who fought for him. These presents of land were called manors. Then the nobles gave some of their land to vassals. The vassals then had to do duties for the nobles. The lands of vassals were called fiefs.
Socialism	A social-economic system in which workers, democratically and socially own the means of production[32] and the economic framework may be decentralized, distributed or centralized planned or self-managed in autonomous economic units.[33] Public services would be commonly, collectively, or state owned, such as healthcare and education.
Statism	A social-economic system that concentrates power in the state at the expense of individual freedom. Among other variants, the term subsumes theocracy, absolute monarchy, Nazism, fascism, authoritarian socialism, and plain, unadorned dictatorship. Such variants differ on matters of form, tactics and ideology.
Welfare state	A social-economic system in which the state plays a key role in the protection and promotion of the economic and social well-being of its citizens. It is based on the principles of equality of opportunity, equitable distribution of wealth, and public responsibility for those unable to avail themselves of the minimal provisions for a good life.
Maps

Democracy Index by the Economist Intelligence Unit, 2017.[34]
Full Democracies
  9–10
  8–9
Flawed Democracies
  7–8
  6–7
Hybrid Regimes
  5–6
  4–5
Authoritarian Regimes
  3–4
  2–3
  0–2

World administrative levels

A world map distinguishing countries of the world as federations (green) from unitary states (blue).
  Unitary states
  Federations
See also
List of forms of government
Central government
Civics
Comparative government
Constitutional economics
Deep state
Digital democracy
E-Government
Government effectiveness index
History of politics
Legal rights
List of countries by system of government
List of European Union member states by political system
Ministry
Political economy
Political history
Politics
Prime ministerial government
State (polity)
Voting system
World government
Principles
Certain major characteristics are defining of certain types; others are historically associated with certain types of government.

Rule according to higher law (unwritten ethical principles) vs. written constitutionalism
Separation of church and state or free church vs. state religion
Civilian control of the military vs. stratocracy
Totalitarianism or authoritarianism vs. libertarianism
Majority rule or parliamentary sovereignty vs. constitution or bill of rights with separation of powers and supermajority rules to prevent tyranny of the majority and protect minority rights
Androcracy (patriarchy) or gynarchy (matriarchy) vs. gender quotas, gender equality provision, or silence on the matter
Autonomy
This list focuses on differing approaches that political systems take to the distribution of sovereignty, and the autonomy of regions within the state.

Sovereignty located exclusively at the centre of political jurisdiction.
Empire
Unitary state
Sovereignty located at the centre and in peripheral areas.
Hegemony
Federation and federal republic
Confederation
Federal monarchy
Diverging degrees of sovereignty.
Alliance
Asymmetrical federalism
Federacy
Associated state
Corpus separatum
Colony
Crown colony
Chartered company
Dependent territory
Occupied territory
Occupied zone
Mandate
Exclusive mandate
Military Frontier
Neutral zone
Colonial dependency
Protectorate
Vassal state
Satellite state
Puppet state
Thalassocracy
Unrecognized state
States with limited recognition
Separatist movement
Government in exile
Micronation
Provisional government
Territorial disputes
Non-self-governing territories
League of Nations
League
Commonwealth
Decentralisation and devolution (powers redistributed from central to regional or local governments)
Notes
 Columbia Encyclopedia, 6th edition. Columbia University Press. 2000.
 Smelser & Baltes 2001, p. ?.
 Christian 2004, p. 245.
 Christian 2004, p. 294.
 The New Encyclopædia Britannica (15th edition)
 Christian 2004, pp. 146–147.
 Kuper & Kuper 2008, p. ?.
 Haider-Markel 2014, p. ?.
 Lewellen 2003, p. ?.
 Comparative politics : interests, identities, and institutions in a changing global order, Jeffrey Kopstein, Mark Lichbach (eds.), 2nd ed, Cambridge University Press, 2005, ISBN 0521708400, p. 4.
 Renna, Thomas (September 2015). "The Holy Roman Empire was neither holy, nor Roman, nor an empire". Michigan Academician. 42 (1): 60–75. doi:10.7245/0026-2005-42.1.60.
 Leo P. Ribuffo, "20 Suggestions for Studying the Right now that Studying the Right is Trendy," Historically Speaking Jan 2011 v.12#1 pp. 2–6, quote on p. 6
 Kari Frederickson, The Dixiecrat Revolt and the End of the Solid South, 1932–1968, p. 12, "...conservative southern Democrats viewed warily the potential of New Deal programs to threaten the region's economic dependence on cheap labor while stirring the democratic ambitions of the disfranchised and undermining white supremacy.", The University of North Carolina Press, 2000, ISBN 978-0-8078-4910-1
 "Plutocrats – The Rise of the New Global Super-Rich and the Fall of Everyone Else" Archived 7 April 2014 at the Wayback Machine
 Hobbes, Thomas. Leviathan  – via Wikisource.
 Paul M. Johnson. "Autocracy: A Glossary of Political Economy Terms". Auburn.edu. Retrieved 14 September 2012.
 "Aristocracy". Oxford English Dictionary. December 1989. Archived from the original on 29 June 2011. Retrieved 22 December 2009.
 Oxford English Dictionary: "democracy".
 Watkins, Frederick (1970). "Democracy". Encyclopædia Britannica. 7 (Expo '70 hardcover ed.). William Benton. pp. 215–23. ISBN 978-0-85229-135-1.
 Montesquieu, The Spirit of the Laws (1748), Bk. II, ch. 1.
 "Republic". Encyclopædia Britannica.
 "republic". WordNet 3.0. Retrieved 20 March 2009.
 "Republic". Merriam-Webster. Retrieved 14 August 2010.
 Montesquieu, Spirit of the Laws, Bk. II, ch. 2–3.
 Steele, David Ramsay (September 1999). From Marx to Mises: Post Capitalist Society and the Challenge of Economic Calculation. Open Court. p. 66. ISBN 978-0875484495. Marx distinguishes between two phases of marketless communism: an initial phase, with labor vouchers, and a higher phase, with free access.
 Busky, Donald F. (20 July 2000). Democratic Socialism: A Global Survey. Praeger. p. 4. ISBN 978-0275968861. Communism would mean free distribution of goods and services. The communist slogan, 'From each according to his ability, to each according to his needs' (as opposed to 'work') would then rule
 Shiach, Morag (2004). Modernism, Labour and Selfhood in British Literature and Culture, 1890–1930. Cambridge University Press. p. 224. ISBN 978-0-521-83459-9
 Zwick, Mark and Louise (2004). The Catholic Worker Movement: Intellectual and Spiritual Origins . Paulist Press. p. 156. ISBN 978-0-8091-4315-3
 Boyle, David; Simms, Andrew (2009). The New Economics. Routledge. p. 20. ISBN 978-1-84407-675-8
 Novak, Michael; Younkins, Edward W. (2001). Three in One: Essays on Democratic Capitalism, 1976–2000. Rowman and Littlefield. p. 152. ISBN 978-0-7425-1171-2
 Storck, Thomas. "Capitalism and Distributism: two systems at war," in Beyond Capitalism & Socialism. Tobias J. Lanz, ed. IHS Press, 2008. p. 75
 Sinclair, Upton (1918). Upton Sinclair's: A Monthly Magazine: for Social Justice, by Peaceful Means If Possible. Socialism, you see, is a bird with two wings. The definition is 'social ownership and democratic control of the instruments and means of production.'
 Schweickart, David. Democratic Socialism Archived 17 June 2012 at the Wayback Machine. Encyclopedia of Activism and Social Justice (2006): "Virtually all (democratic) socialists have distanced themselves from the economic model long synonymous with 'socialism,' i.e. the Soviet model of a non-market, centrally-planned economy...Some have endorsed the concept of 'market socialism,' a post-capitalist economy that retains market competition, but socializes the means of production, and, in some versions, extends democracy to the workplace. Some hold out for a non-market, participatory economy. All democratic socialists agree on the need for a democratic alternative to capitalism."
 "Democracy Index 2017 – Economist Intelligence Unit" (PDF). EIU.com. Retrieved 17 February 2018.
References
Christian, David (2004). Maps of Time. University of California Press. ISBN 978-0-520-24476-4.
Friedrich, Carl J.; Brzezinski, Zbigniew K. (1965). Totalitarian Dictatorship and Autocracy (2nd ed.). Praeger.
Adam Kuper and Jessica Kuper, ed. (2008). The Social Science Encyclopedia. Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-47635-5.
Haider-Markel, Donald P. (2014). The Oxford Handbook of State and Local Government. ISBN 978-0-19-957967-9.
Krader, Lawrence (1968). Formation of the state. Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall. p. 118.
de Mesquita, Bruce Bueno; Smith, Alastair (2011). The Dictator's Handbook: Why Bad Behavior is Almost Always Good Politics. Random House. p. 272. ISBN 9781610390446.
Lewellen, Ted C. (2003). Political Anthropology: An Introduction (3rd ed.). ABC-CLIO. ISBN 978-0-89789-891-1.
Bueno de Mesquita, Bruce; Smith, Alastair; Siverson, Randolph M.; Morrow, James D. (2003). The Logic of Political Survival. The MIT Press. ISBN 978-0-262-63315-4.
William J. Dobson (2013). The Dictator's Learning Curve: Inside the Global Battle for Democracy. Anchor. ISBN 978-0307477552.
Smelser, Neil J.; Baltes, Paul B. (2001). International Encyclopedia of the Social & Behavioral Sciences. Elsevier. ISBN 978-0-08-043076-8.
External links
 Media related to Government at Wikimedia Commons
Government at the Encyclopædia Britannica
The Phrontistery Word List: Types of Government and Leadership
Types of Governments from Historical Atlas of the 20th Century
Other classifications examples from Historical Atlas of the 20th Century
World Affairs: Types of Government
CBBC Newsround: types of government
Bill Moyers: Plutocracy Rising
Phobiocracy by Chris Claypoole
Links to related articles
Portals
Access related topics	
A coloured voting box.svgPolitics portal
Find out more on
Wikipedia's
Sister projects	
Media
from CommonsNews stories
from WikinewsDefinitions
from WiktionaryTextbooks
from WikibooksQuotations
from WikiquoteSource texts
from WikisourceLearning resources
from WikiversityData
from Wikidata
Authority control Edit this at Wikidata	
GND: 4049012-9
Categories: GovernmentPolitical terminologyMain topic articles